---
layout: post
title: "Using Git"
date: 2017-04-05
tags: [Git, Source Control, Tools]
---
{% include JB/setup %}

Over the past month or so I have been hosting my code repositories using GitHub, and have been learning Git along the way. While Visual Studio has a nice interface with Git, I wanted to learn how to use Git from a CLI and basically learn how it works.

I started off with the basic commands (also known as the "porcelain" commands). The first thing to do is <strong>git init</strong>.

```
$ git init
```

This is the command that creates everything needed for a Git repository.
This command will (surprise) initiate a Git repository. It creates a <strong>.git</strong> directory, which contains the following:

```
HEAD
config
description
hooks/
info/
objects/
refs/
```

The most important pieces here are HEAD, objects, and refs. They make up the core of Git: objects stores all of your content, refs store pointers to commit objects, and HEAD points to the branch you are currently working on (in this case, master). So far so good, pretty painless.

Now for simplicity, lets say I want to have a list of animals. So, in the project directory (<strong>not .git</strong>, the CLI will also warn you if you are in the <strong>.git</strong> directory), I simply add a text file named "animals.txt", and add a line with the name of one animal: goat.

To add this file to the repository, I need to use the <strong>git add</strong> command, along with the name of the file.

```
$ git add animals.txt
```

The file isn't yet committed to the repository, however. What <strong>git add</strong> did was create a staging file, called "index" in the <strong>.git</strong> directory. This file is a collection of all the things we want to commit, in the current case, "animals.txt".

To commit the file to the repository, I have to now use the <strong>git commit</strong> command, and supply a message using the -m parameter.

```
$ git commit -m "created animals list"
```

Git will then list off the change made, which looks something like this:

```
[master (root-commit) 4ab4ca3] created animal list
1 file changed, 1 insertion(+)
create mode 100644 animals.txt
```

Git creates a commit object, a blob object for the animals.txt, and a tree object in the .git/objects directory. This can be seen using the <strong>git log</strong> command.

```
$ git log
commit 4ab4ca3ecbed0959ce762c4855c0cdf82e8da0a1
Author: r-abbott
Date: Tue Apr 4 ...

    created animals list
```

The log displays a list of the commits to the branch, in this case there is only one. The commit itself is shown here as a SHA1, which can be used to dig into the commit itself. In the .git/objects directory there are 3 new subdirectories: 4a, 8a, 39.
Notice that one of them is the first 2 characters of the commit SHA1: 4a, and a file with the remaining characters of the SHA1, b4ca3ecbed0959ce762c4855c0cdf82e8da0a1.

This is where the commit object is stored. While the file is compressed, it can be view with the <strong>git cat-file</strong> command.
There are a few handy parameters with this command:

<strong>-t</strong> will display the type of the object, in this case a commit.
```
$ git cat-file -t 4ab4ca3ecbed0959ce762c4855c0cdf82e8da0a1
commit
```

<strong>-p</strong> will display the contents of the file in a readable format.
```
$ git cat-file -p 4ab4ca3ecbed0959ce762c4855c0cdf82e8da0a1
tree 8a71ac7b0b4c888fa25cf32820a0bbd4598b667a
author r-abbott 1491331215 -0500
committer r-abbott 1491331215 -0500
```

So, the commit object contains a reference to a tree's SHA1, and the author & committer information. Back in the <strong>.git/objects</strong> directory, there is also a directory with the first 2 characters of this SHA1: 8a, and a file with the remaining characters. A <strong>tree</strong> is a list of SHA1 references to objects (which could be either blobs or trees).

Lets take a look at its content.

```
$ git cat-file -p 8a71ac7b0b4c888fa25cf32820a0bbd4598b667a
100644 blob 390a25066cd006c67b40f6a11d9bbd00b0f44670    animals.txt
```

This tree only contains one reference, a blob (A <strong>blob</strong> - binary large object - is a compressed object) for the animals.txt file. Once again, there is a directory with the first 2 characters and a file with the remaining.

```
$ git cat-file -p 390a25066cd006c67b40f6a11d9bbd00b0f44670
goat
```

As expected, the data inside the animals.txt file stored in Git is "goat".

Back to our project - I want to have a few animals, so lets add cow, sheep, and chicken to the animals.txt file, then add and commit it.

```
$ git add animals.txt

$ git commit -m "added cow, sheep, and chicken"
[master 06dd10a] added cow, sheep, and chicken
 1 file changed, 4 insertions(+), 1 deletion(-)
```

The log should now show the latest commit:

```
$ git log
commit 06dd10aebb2b3c7c0b136d9e9055d37b041dacc9
Author: r-abbott
Date:   Wed Apr 5 10:38:11 2017 -0500

$ git cat-file -p 06dd10aebb2b3c7c0b136d9e9055d37b041dacc9
tree 1e6d93ea155ebf0d6a87c9b237709adc544726c2
parent 4ab4ca3ecbed0959ce762c4855c0cdf82e8da0a1
author r-abbott 1491406691 -0500
committer r-abbott 1491406691 -0500

added cow, sheep, and chicken
```

Now the commit contains another SHA1 of a <strong>parent</strong>. This is the previous commit, as can be seen by the SHA1. This is important to note: a root commit will have no parents, but all other commits will have one or more parents, which are previous commits.

The tree points to only the animals.txt file like the previous commit, however the SHA1 for this is different.

```
$ git cat-file -p 1e6d93ea155ebf0d6a87c9b237709adc544726c2
100644 blob 421820be0406883da9c778cbbca890f18a884975    animals.txt
```

This file has all of the 4 animals added in this commit.

```
$ git cat-file -p 421820be0406883da9c778cbbca890f18a884975
goat
cow
sheep
chicken
```

But the original file still exists as well! View it using the SHA1 of the original animals.txt.

```
git cat-file -p 390a25066cd006c67b40f6a11d9bbd00b0f44670
goat
```

To summarize how Git stores information:
- A branch (master) points to a commit
- A commit points to a tree (and parents if not root commit)
- A tree points to other trees and blobs.

At this point it is important to note that the project is only stored on the local machine. It hasn't been pushed to a remote repository yet. In another post I will go over working with a remote repository, as well as branching and merging.